# Covariation_with_Linguistic_Variables
A collection of R scripts and presentation on dialect coherence given for a 2022 conference

Abstract:

Individual Coherence & Covariation: Evidence from Appalachia

This paper draws from Guy and Hinskens’ (2016:1) definition of coherence to examine when covariation obtains and whether it is involved with either language change or stable variation over time. Many questions remain as to the role of the individual for coherence, as Tamminga (2021:290) notes, “Our limited understanding of interspeaker covariation is a lacuna in the quantitative sociolinguistics literature”. To address this question of the individual in language variation and change, this paper examines both phonological and morphological variables for natives of Appalachia, a region which underwent substantive change in the 20th century. This paper asks whether changing or stable variables have coherence at the level of the individual as separate from any particular intersection of social factors?

The study draws from analysis of sociolinguistic interviews with sixty-four speakers from the WV region of Appalachia, with an even distribution by gender, region, and age. The speakers were born from 1919 to 1989 and therefore provide an overview of the language changes present in this area of Appalachia in the 20th century. Through FAVE methods, over 60,000 vowels were analyzed for acoustic qualities, with the patterns of the mid-front and high-front vowels in the SVS providing the most discernable distinctions for Southernness. Speakers have also been assessed for morphosyntactic variables (ING, leveled was), consonant variation (L-vocalization, Z-devoicing, H-lenition, Coronal Stop Deletion), as well as quotatives. Some of these variables—such as leveled was, quotatives, and the mid-front vowels—saw sweeping changes, while others—such as ING and the low-back merger—were stable across apparent time. Taking up the methods of Tamminga (2021:279), this paper uses the correlations of by-speaker random intercepts from mixed-effects models to assess how variables covary.

From these studies, this paper asks to what extent does any speaker mirror the patterns of the larger community. Tamminga (2021) finds that coherence of variables occurred before changes began for vowels in Philadelphia, and the timing of coherence and the onset of changes is kept in focus here. Preliminary findings corroborate her assessment that coherence coincides with changes. Findings indicate that some components of the Southern Vowel Shift align with vernacular morphosyntactic variants such as alveolar ING and leveled was for certain individuals but not others. Coherence at the individual level appears to obtain at certain points in apparent time for changing variables when multiple social factors guide vernacular variants in the same direction. As Tamminga (2021:290) writes, “if we can make progress toward quantifying the distribution of speaker-level profiles across the community, we may be able to bridge the gap between the characterization of single speakers and the study of community sociolinguistic stratification in aggregate”. This paper hopes to help bridge that gap.

Guy, Gregory and Frans Hinskens. 2016. Linguistic Coherence. Lingua 172–173: 1–9.
Tamminga, Meredith. 2021. Leaders of language change: Macro and micro perspectives. In Language Variation – European Perspectives VIII. John Benjamins. 270–289.
